## The Autonomous Mode of Production 
The socialist mode of production has failed to displace capitalism; it's supposed successor, the ideal communist mode of production, remains shrouded in myth. Marx and Engels may have been sincere in leaving the ultimate form of communism to the workers. Trotsky, Lenin, Stalin, et al. used this well-meaning ideological freedom to keep the dream of true stateless communism a mirage, a carrot always retreating further from the bloody Stalinist bureaucracy. Indeed, the tools Capitalism used to chip away at Feudalism -- bureaucracy to manage further-flung estates than feudal landlords could, finance capital to fund them through unrealized exploitation of wage labor, and bourgeois democracy to give a facade of legitimacy and moral high ground -- have been adopted almost universally throughout Communist states. 

Russia has bureaucratized cyber-warfare with state-run troll farms, while China deeply entwines their official party and civil service. United Russia is wholly subsumed to Putin's interests, including financial deals in petroleum, real estate, and money laundering -- all deeply entwined with finance capital. The Communist Party of China, ever since the runaway success of Special Economic Zones, has fully embraced capital growth to guarantee dominance, domestically and abroad. Political repression -- protest breaking, barring Alexei Navalny from the presidential race, banning disrespect of the government, and swirling rumors of election fraud -- show that participation in Russia's political system can only be allowed under Putin's political party. Any Russian citizen aware of their country's hackers and trolls meddling in foreign elections would be quite optimistic to imagine those same tools are not used domestically. As for the Chinese, any minority party member knows the scheme of "multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the CCP’s leadership" to be mean absolute deference. All the boxes are now checked: bureaucracy, finance capital, and bourgeois democracy. 

Connecting the points from origin to present shows that, while Marxist Communism may have been on a trajectory towards true communalism and self-management, those who took up the banner have thrown out the map. Today, Communism is just another word for Statism. As an aside, the high geopolitical rankings of monarchies like Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates show that not all feudal power faded with the advent of capitalism. They have adopted finance capital and bureaucratic management, without seeing the need for even a veneer of bourgeois democracy. And indeed, since people might protest without the right to vote, but will riot without the right to work or eat -- both enabled, if poisonously, by capital bureaucracies -- one can see how our surviving monarchies simply had to have made the choices they did. 

Despite the overlap between different Modes of Production, despite States that may straddle lines between them, Marx's framework remains extremely useful. There are endless histories of how the means and relations of production have evolved together: pick the one you want. Just as many mantras are repeated, dogmatic, for how to best marshal our means and relations today. But Marx stood apart in chaining the past, present, and future together in such detail. Unfortunately, most emphasis was on the past and present. Again, we can give Marx the benefit of the doubt. Certainly, it would be difficult to experimentally determine the best way for workers to manage ourselves from exile in a London flat, with no means of production other than writing, and no relations besides to other authors and theoreticians. But Marx's humble restraint set an empty stage, the crowd with baited breath, and no direction from the playwright. Could Marx not have encouraged the masses to write the plays themselves, with their own hands? The void he left was filled with, instead of autonomy and actualization, the bureaucratic, mechanical bloodshed of the Stalinist machine. Indeed, by leaving the ultimate shape of communism shapeless, he may have primed us to believe that great lie, the "withering away of the state", which was always only another carrot to beat Russia with. 

No more vagueries. The next dominant mode of production could be a mutated strain of financial capital, a hybrid of democratic demagoguery and party zealotry, or an augmented "smart bureaucracy" relying as much on algorithm as procedure. 

These are evolutionary dead ends. 

We must break ground, today and every day after, on a new mode of production, the Autonomous mode of production. 

Nothing written here could define what living autonomously means exactly, but there is already a great body of inspiration to draw from. Historically, the experiences of Revolutionary Catalonia and the Ukrainian Free Territory showcase anarchist societies at scale. Today, there are uncountable examples of revolutionary autonomy: the Centros de Apoyo Mutuo, the spread of ZADs, the incredible tenacity and growth of the EZLN, the democratic federalism and self-administration of Rojava, and all the communes practicing intentional living. And always, there are the theories and histories of great writers. 

As individuals, our rule is always to live authentically in our own communities. As anarchists, we must continue the endless labor of forging connections between all disparate autonomous territories, between all schools of thought and experience. This has always true, but anarchists usually speak more of tearing down the old world order, less of building the new one. This is the same mistake Marx made in not truly pursuing and actualizing communism. 

Autonomy must become a viable alternative to capitalism, communism, and whatever despotic beast that rises out of their ruins to shake the stage. To be viable, autonomy must be accessible to all, provide a similar or higher standard of life, and inoculate itself against the convulsions that prey on body politics: poverty, corruption, industrial complexes, lack of cooperation, lack of competition, destruction of the natural world, ruling and urban elites out of touch with the community and reality, squandered resources, unrealized human potential, apathy, and greed. 

The internal contradictions of capitalism are on display today more clearly than ever. Inflation raises education, healthcare, and housing further from the reach of the masses, while hoping cheaper personal vehicles, electronics, and clothing will sooth our rage at glaringly brazen corruption, wealth gaps, and climate destruction. In effect, we are being priced out of citizenship and paid in peanuts. Will we claw over each other for a chance at the dregs of the elite, the rewards they dangle for selling our wage-labor? When every stopgap they employ has failed, will we kill each other for the relics of our global industrial just-in-time production, having forgotten entirely how to rely on ourselves? 

Or will the autonomy we have been quietly building for decades, and continue to, regrow wherever capitalism and communism retreat? Make no mistake, if the groundwork is not put in ahead of time, a sudden collapse of authority is always filled by populists and strong men. Only with a strong idealogical footing and established network can a revolution successfully advance human and ecological interests upon suddenly gaining power. 

Ideally, this is the way the old world ends: Not with a bang, but with a whimper, realizing suddenly: No one is buying their products. No one is listening to their propaganda. No one is applying to their jobs. A revolution tooled for free and open distribution of information, education, & power, for decentralized control, localized production & consumption, will not have to work as hard at earning the trust and cooperation of the people than one geared for war. Unfortunately, in a chaotic world that still can only move as fast as the laws of physics and economics allow, self-defense will be as much of the program as self-actualization, and autonomy will exist alongside capitalism and communism for a good many years to come.

However, technology is advancing faster than the powers that be know how to control it. Decentralized energy generation and storage is becoming more economical; peer to peer mesh networks are a legitimate alternative to centralized ISPs, who always fall under the control of States; vertical farming may offer the solution to widespread famines predicted in a future where we continue to deforest the land and pump pollutants into the air. By moving quickly on these innovations, and more yet to be imagined, autonomous forces can run the ring around State powers. 

Pursuing the Autonomous mode of production globally is the only legitimate hope for a world worth living in, a world where we control the system, instead of being controlled by it. While the urgency of a worldwide autonomous mode of production is obvious and undebatable, the specific Points of Unity will be subject to much debate, and indeed, ever breathing and evolving. We will not make the same mistake as Marx in leaving these Points of Unity unexplored. Nor will we make the mistake of assuming our perspective speaks for all. That is why here we only focus on the need and opportunity, and leave the form and function for next time, for real life. 
